#paper #discussion

## Discussion
To characterize the immune response to _S. pneumoniae_ we proposed a murine model of intranasal infection followed by an _in vitro _stimulation of splenocytes with inactivated bacteria, at different time points after infection. Using a transcriptomic-based approach, our study has highlighted genes and biological pathways associated with the stimulation of baseline and previously infected samples, as well as the cytokines involved in the same processes.

**In accordance with the genes highlighted by the sIPCA, the enrichment analysis has shown that the simple presence of inactivated bacteria leads to the activation of cytokines genes and different immune system pathways, mainly related to innate immunity. However, when this stimulation occurs in previously infected samples, there is a higher number of DEGs, revealing 40 new biological modules distributed across time points.**

Stimulated samples presented downregulation of monocytes modules, together with the upregulation of antigen presentation and cytokine modules, which were also reported in gene expression data from alveolar macrophages (AM) in a pneumococcal colonization study, when comparing volunteers that developed carriage or not after experimental human pneumococcal challenge ([REF](https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201903-0607OC)). In fact, the study did not suggest an increase in monocytes, but a higher monocyte-AM differentiation in people that developed carriage. On the other hand, monocytes seem to be recruited at the nose after the establishment of carriage. ([REF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6241853/) )

The presence of antiviral and viral sensing pathways in stimulated samples, especially from the early time points after infection, is probably associated with the “innate activation by cytosolic DNA sensing” module. This pathway is described as an important activator of antiviral responses, including the release of type I interferon by macrophages, due to the recognition of nucleic acid from _S. pneumoniae _by AIM2 inflammasome and other cytosolic PRR - Pattern Recognition Receptors (Koppe et al., 2012 - BOTH articles). Moreover, different studies have also identified perturbations in the expression of Interferon genes in both carriage and infection (D’Mello et al., 2020; Joyce et al 2009).   	

In brief, Innate immunity modules were present in all comparisons, but adaptive immune modules were activated especially after stimulation of previously infected samples.

While transcriptomics results have shown the presence of a particular response to a second _in vitro_ stimulus, the Bioplex results suggested that this response is marked by different patterns of activation in different time points, with the stimulation allowing a better classification between early time points (1 and 2 days) and late time points (4 and 7) after infection. Moreover, the activated modules and the concentration of the cytokines suggested that both innate and adaptive branches of the immune system participate in the response to the stimulation, contributing to these patterns of activation and suggesting cooperation between them.

In our model, cytokines secreted by macrophages, like MIP-1a (CCL3), KC (CXCL1), IL-1a, IL-1b, and IL-6 had a small, although significant, increase after stimulation of control samples. Despite the observed tendency of increase in the concentration of MIP-1b, Rantes, and TNF-a after stimulation of early time points, no significant change occurs before day 4 after infection. When the _in vitro_ stimulus occurs at late time points after infection, the concentration of all these cytokines significantly increases, especially at day 7.

In fact, innate immune responses to pneumococcus are known for their polarizing action towards Th1 and Th17 responses through the release of cytokines, including the ones cited above, already reported to being released after stimulation of macrophages with killed pneumococcus ([REF](https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/IAI.00871-08)).  

Following this reasoning, it was expected that after the stimulation of baseline samples, adaptive immune cytokines such as IL-17, IFNg, and IL-2 would not present an increase in comparison to unstimulated samples. G-CSF and GM-CSF presented a small increase, although not significant. At early time points G-CSF, GM-CSF, and IL-2 did not present any changes in the concentration between unstimulated and stimulated samples, and IFNg and IL-17 presented a small increase. Unfortunately, for early time points, we only had three samples per group, affecting our capacity to strongly evaluate these changes. At late time points, an important and significant increase in the concentration was observed for all these cytokines, confirming a stronger Th1 and Th17 response to the stimulation at days 4 and 7 after infection.

A previous study has highlighted the action of CD8+ T cells in helping alveolar macrophages to develop a long-lasting memory phenotype, a process that coincided with the entry of T cells in the alveolar tissue, around 5 days after the infection (Yao Y, 2018). The activation of T cells in the spleen could follow a similar behavior in supporting macrophage activity and consequently increasing cytokine release. 

In brief, the enrichment analysis pointed out biological pathways that could only be assessed after stimulation of infected samples. The Bioplex data evinced an important immune response to a second stimulus at days 4 and 7 after infection.

The enrichment analysis (Figure XX) shows the activation of different cytokine pathways after stimulation. Some of these modules were enriched independently of the infection status, others were specific for infected samples. Therefore, the sPLS method was used to assess specific genes correlated with the increase in the concentration of the cytokines.

The eleven genes selected as possible biomarkers are capable of correctly clustering the stimulated samples in the studied groups (baseline, early, and late time points). Sorting by importance, among the first four genes we observed three genes related to cytokines: Il2, Ccr4, and Csf2 presented an increased expression at late time points. The Il2 and Csf2 genes were not only the first and third most important genes for the classification of samples regarding the presence of a previous infection (biomarkers analysis) but they were also among the genes with the highest correlation with the concentration of different cytokines, together with Il2ra gene. This highlights the importance of the IL-2 signaling pathway to the described recall response. Indeed, different vaccine studies reported an increase in IL-2 cytokine after restimulation with pneumococcal proteins or peptides from these proteins (Kataoka et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2014; Goldman et al., 2016; Converso et al., 2017). 

Csf2 gene encodes for Granulocyte/Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), a cytokine that presented one of the highest concentrations after stimulation of infected samples from late time points. Previous studies have described the increase in Csf2 expression and GM-CSF concentration in the lungs from mice infected intranasally with _S. pneumoniae_ (Schmeck, 2004). _In vitro _stimulation of PBMCs with _S. pneumoniae_ has also increased the concentration of this cytokine. Furthermore, a protective role of GM-CSF in pneumococcal infection was described with intra-alveolar administration of this cytokine ([REF](https://www.jimmunol.org/content/187/10/5346.short), [REF](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31994895/)) and the resistance to lung infection attributed to the microbiota was found to be through GM-CSF signaling ([REF](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29142211/)). 

_Cd300ld acts as an activating receptor in myeloid cells and mast cells ([REF](https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/Q8VCH2)), its expression was found to be higher in dendritic-like cells found in mouse spleen, but a link with pneumococcal infection was not yet established in the literature. _

Ccr4 (Chemokine  receptor 4) is known as the major trafficking molecule for Th17 and Treg cells (Lim 2008, Li 2020), but it has been shown that Th2 and Th22 cells dominantly express CCR4 as well (). 

Initial reports suggested that CCR4 was selectively expressed by Th2 cells [3]; however, regulatory T (Treg) cells, Th17 cells, and Th22 cells have also been shown to dominantly express CCR4 [4–6]. Th17 cells share CCR4 as a major trafficking receptor with Treg cells [5], 

_Fpr1 is involved in the chemotaxis of neutrophils and macrophages and inflammatory responses, lack of this gene increased bacterial burden, neutrophil infiltration, and led to a higher mortality rate in a mice mouse model of pneumococcal meningitis (Oldekamp S, 2014). _Nlrp3 is involved not only in the inflammasome activation but also in the Th2 differentiation and different studies have described the role of the Nlrp3 in the lungs in a mouse model of _Streptococcus pneumoniae_-induced pneumonia (van Lieshout, M. H., 2014 ; Kostadinova, E., 2016). Nlrp3 is also known to be activated by pneumolysin, an important virulence factor of _S. pneumoniae_.

_Slpi is a modulator of the innate immunity after bacteria infection, involved in the regulation of the NF-kappa-B activation and inflammatory responses. This gene was previously described as three times higher in the lungs of mice infected with pneumococcus, but not in the spleen, suggesting the local regulation of the SLPI gene expression in response to inflammatory stimuli at the site of inflammation. A similar result was observed in our data, in infected samples the expression of this gene does not increase in the spleens, but after the ex vivo stimulation of these samples, a higher concentration of Slpi transcript was found (Abe, T., 1997)_

_The Chitinase-3-like protein 1, encoded by Chil1, plays a role in T-helper cell type 2 (Th2) inflammatory response and IL-13-induced inflammation, regulating allergen sensitization, inflammatory cell apoptosis, dendritic cell accumulation and M2 macrophage differentiation. It facilitates invasion of pathogenic enteric bacteria into colonic mucosa and lymphoid organs. The lack of this gene in mice infected with S. pneumoniae led to exaggerated lung injury, inflammation and hemorrhage, more frequent bacterial dissemination, decreased bacterial clearance, and enhanced mortality compared to controls._

The transcriptomic approach, together with the cytokines, are important techniques to assess immunological information after an infection or vaccination and our results suggested that the _in vitro _stimulation could be an important step to understand the systemic response to pneumococcus. Moreover, the possibility of selecting a few features could also be useful to identify the presence of a recall immune response in pneumococcal vaccine studies. 

Our study has shown the presence of a recall immune response after stimulation of previously infected samples and the possibility of feature selection to address this response.