#paper #intro

_Streptococcus pneumoniae _is a major human pathogen responsible for various diseases, including life-threatening conditions such as pneumonia, sepsis, and meningitis (Weiser, 2018). Current vaccines have been very efficient in reducing the death toll caused by this pathogen. However, strains not covered by the available vaccines represent a growing concern (Kaplan, 2013 and Pirez, 2014, [REF](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32530357/)), demanding new serotype-independent strategies (Pichichero, 2017 and Briles, 2019). Models to assess the response to new vaccine candidates would be of great use.

_In vitro _stimulation with live or killed bacteria has been used for decades for understanding the host’s response to different pathogens, including _S. pneumoniae  _(Zhan, 1995; Schultz, 1998; Wu, 2011; de Stoppelaar, 2016; Jochems, 2019). This technique has also been applied in vaccine studies, characterizing the immune response after a second stimulus (Moffitt, 2011; ). Gene expression and cytokine secretion were two of the tools employed by previous works to understand immune profiling.

Previous studies on vaccination and infection have used the stimulation or the restimulation of immune system cells as a method to study the immune response after a first stimulus with the same microorganism (Shao et al.,  2015; Paranavitana et al., 2010). In the present study, we propose the combination of transcriptomic and cytokine assays from mouse splenocytes to assess the memory response in the days following pneumococcal infection.

The spleen plays a vital role in host defenses against encapsulated blood-borne pathogens due to its elevated perfusion, providing efficient immune surveillance of the circulatory system (Cerutti et al., 2013). In a pneumococcal bacteremia model, bacteria present a tropism to the spleen, which is also responsible for the clearance of the bacteria from the blood (Deniset et al., 2017).

The splenic Marginal Zone (MZ) is a crucial area of antigen presentation to MZ B cells, capable of rapidly differentiating into plasmablasts, secreting low-affinity IgM and IgG (Chiara thesis ref??). Moreover, macrophages present in the splenic Red Pulp (RP) are also implicated in the response to the pneumococcal infection, responsible for an initial binding and subsequent clearance of _S. pneumoniae _mediated by mature neutrophils present on the Red Pulp (Deniset et al., 2017; Oggioni). 

Previous studies leveraged RNA sequencing technologies to gain insights into the host's response in different conditions due to the possibility of analyzing more than 20 thousand genes (ref). In the current study, we propose the use of this technology to study the host responses to pneumococcal infection and understand the response to a stimulus post-infection, addressing the main genes and cytokines responsible for the response.
