#paper #methods

## Animals and Animal Infection

Seven-week female C57BL/6 mice were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions, at 20-24°C, with 55 ± 10% of humidity, food and water ad libitum, treated according to national guidelines. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee “Comitato Etico Locale dell’Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese” and by the Italian Ministry of Health (project number 304/2018-PR).

Mouse-passaged TIGR4 strain of _Streptococcus pneumoniae _(Canvin et al., 1995; Gerlini et al., 2014) was inoculated 1:50 in TSB (Tryptic-Soy Broth, Becton Dickinson, USA) supplemented with 0.1% of glucose (PanReac, Applichem, Italy), 1% of yeast extract (Oxoid, UK) and 0.016 M K2HPO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) (TSB-GYP). When the bacterial culture reached the mid/exponential phase (≈OD590= 0,6), it was centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 10 minutes and resuspended in an appropriate volume of saline. The culture was Gram-stained before centrifugation and, after, bacterial vital counts were performed using the multilayer plating method (Iannelli and Pozzi, 2004). Mice were lightly anesthetized with intraperitoneal administration of 11.25 mg/kg tiletamine hydrochloride/zolazepam and 3 mg/kg xylazine and infected by intranasal instillation of 10^7 CFU of TIGR4, prepared as described above. Mice were euthanized at different time points, as shown in Figure 1. The control group was composed of non-infected mice.

## Spleen collection
After aseptic removal at different time points (days 0, 1, 2, 4, and 7 after infection), spleens were meshed using a scalpel and scraper. Following the disposal of centrifuged samples and supernatant, samples of lysed red blood cells were washed, centrifuged, and resuspended in cRPMI for cell counting by an automatic cell counter (Bio-Rad, USA).

## Spleen stimulation for cytokine secretion assay

Splenocytes were cultured in a U-bottom 96-well plate in triplicate for 72 hours at 37°C with 5% CO2 in complete RPMI. The Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium is suitable for a variety of mammalian cells. The RPMI 1640 medium (Lonza, Belgium) was supplemented with 10% of fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, USA) and 1% of penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich), composing the complete RPMI medium (cRPMI).

TIGR4 bacteria were previously inactivated by adding formalin 1,5% for 2 hours on a roller mixer at room temperature. The cultures were in the presence or not of inactivated TIGR4, at a cell:bacteria ratio of 1:10. Unstimulated control splenocytes were cultured in cRPMI alone, and positive control splenocytes were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 µM of Ionomycin. After stimulation, cells were harvested and centrifuged at 500 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was recovered and frozen at -80 °C for subsequent Bio-Plex assay. 

Cytokine production by in vitro re-stimulated splenocytes was assessed with the Bio-Plex Multiplex immunoassay (Bio-Rad, USA) according to manufacturer guidelines. A standard curve was obtained based on eight points, generated by four-fold serial dilutions performed with the standard reconstituted in cRPMI. The concentrations (pg/mL) of the following cytokines were calculated based on this standard curve: IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, IL-12p40, IL-12p70, IL-13, IL-17, Eotaxin, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFNG, KC, MCP-1 (MCAF), MIP-1α, MIP-1β, RANTES, and TNF-α.

## Spleen Stimulation for RNA-sequencing

In a U-bottom plate, 1 x 10^6 splenocytes/well were seeded in quintuplicate and cultured for 6 hours at 37°C with 5% CO2 in cRPMI in the presence of inactivated TIGR4 at a cell:bacteria ratio of 1:10. Unstimulated control splenocytes were cultured in cRPMI alone. Upon stimulation, cell replicates were centrifuged at 500 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded, the pellet resuspended in 50 µl of lysis buffer RA1 (Macherey-Nagel, Germany), flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -70°C for subsequent RNA extraction. 

## RNA extraction, Library Preparation, and Sequencing
The RNA purification was performed with the NucleoSpin® RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel), and, before DNAse treatment, the extracted RNA was quantified by the Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA),  using the Qubit RNA BR (Broad-Range) Assay Kit. 

Contaminating DNA was removed from the extracted RNA by adding 10X TURBO DNase Buffer (TURBOTM DNase, Ambion by Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 µl of TURBO DNase (Ambion), and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. After purification by the RNA Clean & Concentrator Kit (Zymo Research, USA), the obtained RNA was quantified using the Qubit® RNA BR Assay Kit.

Library preparation was performed as described in a previous publication ([REF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7908976/)), using the Ion AmpliSeq™ Transcriptome Mouse Gene Expression Kit from AmpliSeq (Thermo Fisher Scientific), allowing the amplification of 23,930 target genes. Moreover, it was assigned a unique barcode for each sample.

Libraries were diluted to 50 pM and pooled in equal volumes (7 μl), with eight individual samples per pool and loaded onto Ion PI™ Chip v3s using the Ion Chef™ Instrument. Sequencing was performed using Ion Proton™ Sequencer. 

All described steps were performed according to manufacturing instructions. 

## RNA-sequencing Data Analysis
R software in version 3.6.3 was used for transcriptomic data analysis. The DESeq2 package (Love MI, 2014), performs differential expression analysis and multiple test correction, returning values of LogFC and adjusted p values. Genes with an adjusted p value smaller than 0.05 and an absolute value of logFC greater than 0.5 were classified as differentially expressed and then used in the enrichment analysis performed by the hypergeometric test from the _tmod_ package (Weiner J 3rd, 2016) using the Blood Transcription Modules (BTM) database (Li Shuzhao, 2014).

## Cytokine Data Analysis

**The software GraphPad Prism 8.0 was used to perform the statistical analysis. The cytokine concentrations between stimulated and unstimulated samples were compared using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, a non-parametric test used to compare two related samples. Samples from different time points were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test, a non-parametric test for non-matched samples. A p-value lower than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.**

## Biomarkers

**	**The DaMiRseq (Chiesa M, 2018) package was used to find possible biomarkers of the host response to the second stimuli, the inactivated bacteria. Stimulated samples were selected and divided into three groups: baseline, infected samples at days 1 and 2 (early time points), and infected samples at days 4 and 7 (late time points). Following a pipeline that permits normalization, data adjustment, and feature selection, the DaMiRseq package ranks the most important features to distinguish the three classes. The number of selected genes was chosen based on the importance established by the package; genes with a scaled importance score higher than 0.5 were chosen. (Supplementary materials XX)

## Data Integration

To integrate RNA-sequencing results and the Cytokines Bioplex, we selected the concurrent samples from both experiments, and we performed the sparse version of Partial Least Squares (sPLS), provided by the MixOmics package. The PLS method maximizes the covariance between components from two data sets, in our case, the transcriptomic and cytokines assay data. The sparse version sPLS applies LASSO penalization in each pair of loading vectors from PLS, being able to correlate these variables (Lê Cao et al. 2008).

According to the $Q^2$ criterion, two components would be sufficient to run the model (Q<sup>2</sup> of 0.22 and 0.21). As suggested by the _tune_._spls _function, the optimal variable number chosen in each component resulted in 70 genes from component 1 and 3 from component 2.