#paper #notes


Besides the hypothesis of collaboration between innate and adaptive immunity, the “trained immunity” in macrophages would also be an explanation for the presence of a higher concentration of cytokines released by macrophages at late time points. (Explain the concept of trained immunity). 

The role of MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in trained immunity has already been described ([REF](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23867934/)). Up-regulated in the presence of inflammatory signals, miR-155 was indicated as an important miRNA in the context of trained immunity and previous studies have hypothesized that myeloid cells expressing miR-155 in a sustained manner would remain in a primed, hyper-sensitive state: upon exposure to a secondary stimulus of identical strength, they  would be able to respond in an enhanced manner compared to the primary stimulation ([REF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5087274/)).

## Other enrichment discussions

The highest increase in cytokine concentrations after stimulation occurred on day 7 after infection and was found for IL-17a, followed by GM-CSF and Interferon-gamma. This is in concordance with the activated pathways found in the enrichment analysis, where the Th17, IL-17 signaling, and T cells related pathways were positively influenced by both the stimulation process and the later time points. 

Recall immune responses involving the Th17 branch of the immune system were already described in both colonization and infection by _S. pneumoniae_. In carriage mouse models, the mechanisms that allow rapid clearance of pneumococci after a secondary challenge are dependent on TLR2, T CD4+ cells, and IL-17a (Zhang Z, 2009). 

Studies have documented that prior colonization can induce protection against subsequent direct lung challenge with a homologous serotype strain (D39), and this  protection is dependent on antibodies and T-helper type 17 (Th17) CD4+ cells (Cohen, J.M, 2011; Wilson, R, 2014)

In infection mouse models, a prior sublethal lung infection 30 days before the challenge (lethal dose of TIGR4 direct in the lungs) has shown that the T-helper type 17 CD4+ cells are responsible for the immune mechanism of cross-protection against pneumonia (Wang Y, 2016). 

This study emphasized the local characteristic of the primary and recall immune responses, characterized by the predominance of Th17 CD4+ T cells, since they found an increase of these cells in the lung mucosa but not in the spleen. However, in this study, the second stimulus with the bacteria was performed using a direct lung infection model ([REF](https://www.nature.com/articles/mi201641)). Our study focused on an _ex vivo_ stimulus directly in the splenocytes, showing not only a Th1 and Th17 activation, but also innate immunity participation.

---
Previous studies have shown that in the absence of any stimulation with PMA or anti-CD3, PLY alone was unable to promote cytokine secretion by splenocytes. However, we did find significant enhancing effects of PLY on IFN-γ secretion by splenocytes stimulated with heat-killed S. pneumoniae (HkSp) and PMA/ionomycin

This more rapid clearance was associated with consistently higher numbers of monocyte/macrophages during the observation period,** although these differences did not achieve statistical significance until day 5 after inoculation**. During the second challenge, there was also an increase in transcription of the CCL2/monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) in the nasal epithelium. In this study, the expression of MCP-1, a chemokine that can recruit monocytes in a Th17-dependent manner, was increased during the secondary pneumococcal challenge. In our study, however, this cytokine concentration was lower in stimulated samples in the first time points, being no significantly different in later time points. At the same time, there was a huge increase in IL-17A concentration between the stimulated and non-stimulated groups.

To determine whether these observations were also applied in infectious settings, we examined Th17 cells generated in a model of persistent Streptococcus pneumoniae nasopharyngeal colonization. Colonization using S. pneumoniae strain EF3030 induces long-term focal infection that resolves in B6 mice by 4 weeks post inoculation28. Importantly, protection against S. pneumoniae nasopharyngeal colonization has been shown to require Th17 cells29, and GM-CSF-producing T cells are also produced in response to this infection30. S. pneumoniae-induced Th17 cells were detectable in the spleen by day 7, peaked at d21, remained above baseline 84 days post-primary infection, and were substantially expanded 5 days post reinfection (Supplementary Fig. 3). The majority of the initial (d7 post inoculation) Th17 cells generated in response to infection expressed CCR6 and were followed by the later emergence of CCR6−CCR2+ Th17 cells by d21 post infection (Fig. 4c). CCR6−CCR2+ Th17 cells were still detectable 84 days post-primary infection and were substantially expanded 5 days post secondary infection (Fig. 4c), indicating that CCR6−CCR2+ Th17 cells contribute to the memory compartment in this model. Importantly, Th17 populations generated in response to persistent bacterial infection displayed similar cytokine-secreting repertoires as observed in EAE, as GM-CSF+ or IFNγ+ Th17 cells were found almost exclusively in the CCR6−CCR2+ population (Fig. 4d). Thus, CCR6−CCR2+ defines the GM-CSF/IFNγ-producing population of Th17 cells that arise in a model of persistent extracellular bacterial infection. ([REF](https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms9644?origin=ppub))

---

_The protein encoded by Spp1 acts as a cytokine involved in enhancing production of interferon-gamma and interleukin-12 and reducing production of interleukin-10 and is essential in the pathway that leads to type I immunity ([REF](https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P10923)). The lack of Spp1 in mice led to a significantly higher bacterial burden in both BALF and lung tissue than did wild-type mice. The lack of Spp1 also led to higher levels of cytokines and immune cells in BALF than did Spp1+/+ mice after infection with S. pneumoniae following induced allergic inflammation ([REF](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/all.13646))._
